Vulnerability Scanning with Nmap
As an alternative to Nessus, we can
also use the Nmap Scripting Engine
to perform automated vulnerability scans.
While the NSE is not a full-fledged
vulnerability scanner,
it does have a respectable
library of scripts
that can be used to detect
and validate vulnerabilities.
NSE scripts range in functionality from
brute force and authentication
to detecting and
exploiting vulnerabilities.
For our purposes, we will focus
on the scripts in the “vuln”
and “exploit” categories,
as the former detects a vulnerability
and the latter attempts to exploit it.
However, there is overlap
between these categories
and some “vuln” scripts may essentially
run stripped-down exploits.
For this reason, scripts are
also further categorized as
“safe” or “intrusive”.
We should take great care
when executing the latter
because they may crash a remote
service or take down the target.
On Kali, the NSE scripts can be
found in the nmap “scripts” directory.
This folder also contains a script.db file
that serves as an
index to all of the scripts.
It also categorizes
each of the Nmap scripts.
We could, for example,
use the file to grep for scripts in the “vuln” and “exploit” categories.
Let’s try to use an NSE script
to detect a vulnerability.
For this example,
we will use “script vuln”
to run all scripts in the “vuln” category
against a target in the labs.
We see that one of the
NSE scripts successfully detected
an Adobe Coldfusion
vulnerability on our target.
This is rather interesting and
worth further investigation.
While Nmap is not a vulnerability
scanner in the traditional sense,
it can be very useful for similar tasks.
However, Nmap also requires
heeding the same warnings
applicable to traditional
vulnerability scanners.
We must understand
what the scripts will
and will not check for, the amount
of traffic the scripts will generate,
and what potential dangers we may incur with each script.